<code>box-shadow</code> is arguably one of the coolest things to come out of CSS3. However I've been creating shadows in Adobe Fireworks and Photoshop for years so I feel like I'm too constrained by CSS3's <code>box-shadow</code> implementation. In an effort to expand my boxy horizons, I set out on a quest to create some cooler shadows.<!--more-->

<strong>Disclaimer:</strong> At the time of this writing filters and transforms still require browser prefixes to work, though filters will only work in Webkit browsers. I have omitted these prefixes from the code examples here for readability but they will be required if you intend to use these techniques.

<h2>Rocking out with box-shadow</h2>

My first attempt at making my shadows more dynamic still uses <code>box-shadow</code> but it extends its use to create a new effect. My main goal was to avoid using any extra elements, so all we need is a div and we'll leverage pseudo elements to do the rest of the work.

[codepen_embed slug_hash='Jrhpc']

What we've done is created two transparent pseudo elements behind our main element. These two pseudo elements then have <code>box-shadow</code> applied. This is done so that we can use 2D transforms to angle them, creating a 3D looking <code>box-shadow</code> for their parent element.

We also used the <code>top</code>, <code>bottom</code>, <code>left</code>, and <code>right</code> properties to keep the shadow from spilling out from the sides of the parent element.

<h2>Box-shadow... without box-shadow?</h2>

I was pretty happy with the previous idea, but it didn't look as awesome as I hoped. My next idea was to create the same effect using gradients.

[codepen_embed slug_hash='aybiL']

This time we're still using our pseudo elements but instead of giving them <code>box-shadow</code>s, we'll give them gradients. We also used a new CSS3 property called <code>filter</code>. Make sure to check out all the nifty things it can do <a href="http://html5-demos.appspot.com/static/css/filters/index.html">here</a>. We just use the blur to soften the edges and make it look more like a shadow.

<h2>Oooooh... that's way prettier.</h2>

While I was working on this project I ran across a site with an even cooler style of drop-shadow that pointed inward rather than outward:

<a href="http://http://demo.truethemes.net/Karma-Wordpress/">Karma</a>

All I really had to do was flip my last idea and we were good to go!

[codepen_embed slug_hash='zEtgJ']

<h2>Conclusion</h2>

If you use any of these drop shadows, post a link in the comments! Also, if you come up with any alternative ideas or issues that should be noted, let me know.
